Lumiera Workflow Proposals
Wouter Verwijlen
Last updated: 3 April 2025
I would like to share a first version of a collection of workflow ideas for Lumiera. These ideas come
from having cut hundreds (or possibly thousands) of videos over the past 20 years as a professional
editor, working in Avid Media Composer, Adobe Premiere Pro (from before it was called "Pro"),
Lightworks and DaVinci Resolve.
The main ideas behind these proposals are:
•

Editing should feel as organic as possible. An editor should perceive the NLE as an
extension of their body, where interaction with the NLE will ultimately become natural. This
does not mean that a user should immediately understand everything without there being a
certain learning curve. Some new concepts might take a while to master.

•

An editor should not be able to accidentally overwite part of their work in the timeline when
that part is not within sight (in other words: when it's offscreen). This includes throwing
things out of sync, losing transitions, or overwriting clips.

•

Interaction with a NLE shouldn't depend on a specific device. It should be possible to
operate Lumiera with only the keyboard, only the mouse, other peripherals or a combination
of these. We can nudge people towards ways of working we think are optimal, but we
shouldn't dictate how to use this application. Many different editors work on many different
types of content, and each type of content requires different workflows, some of which we
might not even foresee. We can't make a one size fits all solution in terms of workflow,
unless we would target Lumiera at a very specific professional field (for example: only long
form films and not short social media content). But even within the same types of content
I've seen different editors using different ways of working.
So if the aim for Lumiera is to be a general purpose video editing application, then we can
not force any specific way of doing things and instead we should support many different
workflows, in other words: provide a platform with possibilities for each editor to make it
their own (which will arguably be a harder goal to achieve). Instead of a "we know what's
best for you" approach I propose a "smart defaults with many options for configuration"
approach.

•

A big question is: who is "the user"? We aim to create a tool for professionals, but there are
many types of professionals working in entirely different parts of the media industry or in
other fields. In the previous paragraph it was mentioned that different types of content
require different types of workflows. How to accomodate all of these different people who
work on different things?
I would like to propose a set of personas to keep in mind while designing the application.
Examples of such personas could be:
◦ The highly specialised editor who works in an environment where different parts of the
post-production of a film are handled by different people: assisant editors, colorists,
audio engineers, etc.
◦ The allround contracted editor who handles all aspects of post-production
◦ The allround artistic filmmaker who also edits

◦ The allround social media creator who values the use of visual effects, motion graphics
and sound effects.
◦ The free-flowing editor who doesn’t have a fixed idea of how the edit should be and
instead wants to play and move things around, and who might not work in a linear
fashion: they might do a bit of color correction to get a better sense of how a scene feels,
then go back to editing, etc.
◦ The editor who has the film already cut in their head and have a very strong sense of
what they want to do and work in a very structured way towards accomplishing this
vision.
Of course, there are many more types of people and many people who are a combination of
personas. These are only meant to paint the spectrum of possibilities.
•

Lumiera provides a chance to reimagine how an NLE could work, in other words: how it
can be designed around modern ways of interacting with computers. In that sense there is
total freedom to create innovative new solutions to improve how people edit videos. On the
other hand, if we create paradigms that are too uncommon, new users might not understand
Lumiera fast enough and move on to something else. There's a balance to be found between
providing familiarity and innovation, and we need to think carefully when breaking
traditional paradigms about the reason they have existed for so long and if it’s worth
breaking them.
In any case, I think we should at least make an effort to study the way current NLE's work,
and while we might never know for sure what the reasoning behind their workflow designs
was, we should make an attempt to understand this reasoning. Some designs might have
come from technical limitations, and others might have had really clever thinking behind
them. Let's see what we can learn from that.

•

Ideally we should also include workflows for editors using XR headsets in combination with
controllers or even hand tracking. While I do have a headset at work that I experiment with,
we might want someone with actual XR design skills to be involved here.

Initially I would like to focus on the most fundamental tasks that each and every editor has to deal
with while creating a video:
1. Finding the parts you need out of a lot of source material (logging and organizing footage)
2. The timeline as the editor’s canvas: inserting and grouping material, arranging clips,
trimming and other timeline features
3. Finishing: audio mixing, color correction, titles, effects, exporting
4. The broader GUI concept
Many of the ideas presented here are not necessarily unique: a lot of these either exist in one NLE
or another, or might be more common in so-called Digital Audio Workstations (DAWs). This
document closely inspects the working of other software applications to see how we can learn from
those.
These proposals are by no means finished or complete. They are merely meant to be the starting
point for discussion and would also require user testing. We will want to iterate over certain ideas so
that they will evolve over time, while others might be rejected completely, which is totally fine, of
course.

The current NLE landscape
A few decades ago there was this idea that only a single application could be called ‘the best’, in
other words: the one true NLE to rule them all. Some even went as far as calling it “the NLE wars”.
There was fierce competition between Avid Media Composer, Final Cut Pro, and Adobe Premiere
and each had its fans. Over the years this discussion faded away. Final Cut Pro was disregarded by
many after the radical rewrite that was released as Final Cut Pro X. Avid Media Composer retained
its spot as the industry standard for television and feature film, while Adobe Premiere Pro
conquered the rest of the media industry. It became clear that no single NLE would be ‘the best’ for
all people and all purposes. They each had their own sets of strengths and weaknesses, and therefore
each would find its own audience.
While NLE’s evolved in de 2010’s, differences between them grew.
Media Composer and Lightworks were already very powerful NLE’s, specialised in the core editing
process, mostly for longer format productions. They offered many configuration options and in turn
had a high learning curve.
Final Cut Pro X sat on the other end of the spectrum. It had few configuration options but was easy
to learn. It became popular among a new crowd: the solo content creators.
Then in between sat Premiere Pro, comfortably. It profited massively from being part of the
Creative Suite, later the Creative Cloud: for many media companies it was very cost effective to pay
Adobe a single sum of money (pre-Creative Cloud) and later subscription fees, and receive all the
tools they could possibly need for media creation. But also the application itself was an all-in-one
solution for all parts of post-production: it offered many tools for audio mixing, color grading,
visual effects, etc. Sure, Media Composer and FCPX also offered tools for these jobs, but were less
developed in these areas and often required plugins to achieve many of the more advanced tasks.
Then came along DaVinci Resolve, a color grading application that was bought by Blackmagic
Design and transformed into another all-in-one powerhouse, which slowly started to take a seat next
to Premiere’s throne.
In the meantime the media landscape changed. NLE’s became more affordable and hardware more
capable, and the result was that editing was no longer a thing only done by professionals: everybody
became an editor, and everybody could edit any moment, anywhere, on laptops, tablets or
smartphones. Social media became a huge new platform where many new makers developed their
own channels and found an audience for their videos. And so came NLE’s that were focussed on
social media content, most notably CapCut. It took FCP’s idea of easy to learn even farther and
offered many one-click visual effects, automatic subtitles and mostly: a lot of effect presets and
assets (titles, other graphics, music) available within the application.
Right now we’re witnessing the early stages of the introduction of AI in most NLE’s. This expands
the possibilities for manipulating video and audio without requiring much technical knowledge.
Voices, music, video clips and even rough cuts can be generated. Audio issues can easily be fixed,
mixing and mastering can be done automatically, tracking en keying becomes a lot easier than it
used to, to name a few things.
And that’s basically where we are now. There’s not one editor to rule them all, there are many, and
they all shine in different fields or sectors. Some NLE’s try to expand and cater to different crowds
(Lightworks for example, received an easier GUI and many presets and assets to attract social
media content creators), others decided to just keep on doing what they’ve always been good at.
The question is: where will we position Lumiera? Due to targeting the Linux platform, it makes
most sense to try and sit in the middle of everything. If we specialise too much, the potential user
base might be too small, although in all fairness, this is an assumption not backed by any real world

data. Would there be a way to check the validity of this statement? And how should we quantify
"too small"? This is a topic that requires more discussion.

Chapter 1: working with source material
To be written.

Chapter 2: the timeline
The timeline is the core of the editing application. This is the editor’s canvas: the space where the
actual film or video is constructed, or rather: crafted. Therefore it is of the highest importance for
Lumiera to feature a timeline that takes the best of what current NLE’s have to offer, while thinking
carefully on how we can improve upon these ways of working. There are many different aspects to
working in the timeline which I will explore in the different subsections of this chapter.

Tracks vs trackless
Traditionally, NLE's have been track-based. The reason for this is that they have been modelled
after analog hardware. For example, Adobe Premiere's predecessor ReelTime was created to work
like 3/4" tape decks.
I'd like to quote Randy Ubillos, original creator of ReelTime and Final Cut Pro:
"In a track based system the layers at the beginning, middle and end all share the exact same tracks
and you’re always potentially disrupting things in other parts of the project when you make changes
in another area. One of the most common things I heard from editors was that as a project
progressed the likelihood of a change in one part of a project having an unintended effect
somewhere else in the timeline went up dramatically. Tracks implicitly put a relationship between
all of the items in that track, even though they may be actually completely unrelated. "
Source: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/interview-randy-ubillos-developer-fcp-x-david-busse
Tracks have several advantages:
•

They give us a way to organise our timeline by dedicating certain types of clips to certain
tracks. For example:
◦ Interview shots on V1
◦ B-roll on V2
◦ Graphics on V3
Or for audio:
◦ Dialog on A1 + A2
◦ Music on A3 + A4
◦ Sound effects on A5-A8

•

They allow for track-based effects (usually only implemented on the audio side).

•

They support editing by keyboard, as you can toggle tracks on and off and bind this to keys.

Disadvantages of tracks:
•

They’re quite inflexible: you can't easily change their order.

•

As we saw in Randy’s quote, later in the editing process, when timelines become more
complex, it's easy to mess things up. Often not all tracks are visible within the viewport and
therefore you will need to remember its state (enabled/disabled/sync locked) and contents
or else a trim operation might throw things out of sync, or you might accidentally overwrite
clips. Similar issues can happen horizontally. In Avid for example, I've seen people make an
entire row of empty cuts at the end of their timeline, simply so they can check later if
anything was accidentally thrown out of sync. Lightworks has out-of-sync indicators to
mitigate sync issues.

•

Clips that naturally belong together are separated, for example b-roll and associated sound
effects. Instead, clips that only share a shallow relation are grouped together.

•

To me, personally, track management takes me out of my storytelling flow. It's a necessity
that doesn't directly aid in the creative process.

Editors often proudly share screenshots of their timelines on social media, and they do look
impressive, but these are in fact pretty fragile structures.

One of my own timelines, which is relatively simple by comparison to those of many Hollywood movies

So naturally, a question would be: what will happen if we would let go of the track paradigm? This
is what Final Cut Pro has done, starting from the rewrite of Final Cut Pro X. At the time, a
disastrous marketing campaign caused many editors to leave the application, although more and
more people are starting to realise that many of its ideas were way ahead of its time. It’s still the
only big NLE out there that was designed with computers in mind, and not analog hardware.
It’s not entirely trackless, but it manages to hide the concept of tracks from the user. In a nutshell, it
works by having a primary storyline (in a track-based NLE this would be V1+A1) where you build
the foundation of your edit. Then the video clips you put on top and the audio clips you put below
get connected to one or more clips from the primary storyline. Move a clip on the primary storyline,
and all connected clips automatically move with it. With a modifier key you can ignore clip
connections, so that you can also easily move a primary clip elsewhere without its connected
siblings coming along.
Sounds good! Why not just copy this? One reason is that FCP assumes that all clips clips that are
not on the primary storyline should be connected to this primary storyline. This might work well for
fiction films, but not necessarily for other types of video. Earlier I mentioned an example of sound
effects that share a connection to b-roll on a higher layer. FCP won’t allow you to connect them.
How else could we group clips together that ought to be connected? We could potentially group
them in compound clips that are directly editable, like so:

However, there are a few problems with this: we expect rendering to happen from top to bottom, in
which case the b-roll would cover the subtitles. On top of that, it’s hard to see at which points video
clips overlap. Last but not least: it looks rather unorganised.
Can we restructure this? Perhaps like this:

But how exactly would a user interact with a timeline like this? You’d need a toggle somewhere
(and corresponding keyboard shortcut) to toggle the compounds on and off. When the compounds
are enabled, you can move entire compound clips at once. When turned off, you could edit any
individual clip. When using the keyboard, one could cycle through all visible compound clips with
a key like Tab and then perform actions on the compound clip, or choose to step ‘into’ and ‘out of’
these compound clips to work on the material inside.
This rises another question: would enabling/disabling of compounds actually be an improvement
over track management? This idea clearly needs a lot more thought and development to see if it
could actually work in a real-world editing scenario, but it might be an interesting direction to
explore.

Inserting material onto the timeline
To be written.

Grouping material: sections
I would like to propose the ability to divide a timeline into multiple sections. Each of these sections
will have a header in the ruler that can be edited, to give each section a name (similar to how
duration markers in Premiere are displayed).

The benefits of sections:
•

Creating a broad sense and clear overview of how a timeline is constructed. Background
colors in the timeline will make it easy to differentiate between different sections.

•

Easy navigation between sections by keyboard shortcuts.

•

Keeping sync. All clips in a section are encapsulated. If you work in one section, you will
not be able to throw clips in other sections out of sync. Users could also time-lock a section,
so it will stay in place regardless of other edit operations. This is especially useful when
editing on music, but will also prevent losing sync between other elements that have been
carefully lined up. Sections will not prevent anyone throwing anything out of sync within a
section, but at least not the entire timeline will be affected.

•

The order of sections can easily be changed by clicking and dragging. This way sections can
be used to, for example, easily change the order of scenes. The free-flowing editor for
example, can construct different parts of their edit on different parts of the timeline in
different sections, and then arrange them later.

•

Sections could have a versioning system: this would allow the user to try different cuts
within a section and to quickly change between these different versions.

Several other characteristics of sections:
•

Clips can be excluded from being part of a section. For example: music tracks could span
the entire length of a video by not being included in any section.

•

When working within a section, its size will adapt to your edit operations (so its edges will
shrink or expand automatically while trimming or moving clips).

•

A new timeline will have one large section spanning its entire length. A “split section”
button and keyboard shortcut will create new sections.

Things to consider:
•

How to move clips from one section to another?

•

If sections can be time-locked then they will probably need to be able to overlap.

Navigating the timeline
Quick timeline navigation is key in editing. Let’s start by examining how other NLE’s deal with
this. We need to make a distinction between:
•

Moving the viewport: the visible section of the timeline.

•

Moving the playhead (which will ultimately also move the viewport, once the playhead goes
offscreen).

Moving the viewport, by mouse:
•

This usually happens by dragging scrollbars.

•

In pretty much every application the scrollwheel can be used to scroll either horizontally or
vertically (usually a setting defines the default direction, and the other direction can be
toggled with a modifier key).

•

DaVinci Resolve allows moving the viewport by middle mouse dragging. Quite useful,
actually.

Moving the viewport, by keyboard:
•

Some apps use Page Up/Down for this (i.e. Premiere).

•

Resolve scrolls the timeline vertically with Page Up and Down and supports shortcuts for
Previous/Next Timeline Page.

Moving the viewport, by other device:
•

I don't recall having seen this option anywhere.

Moving the playhead, by mouse:
•

Avid allows doing this by clicking anywhere in the timeline (as long as the smart tools are
disabled, else you need to click in empty areas).

•

FCP skims the timeline by default when moving the mouse. Clicking parks the playhead in a
new location.

•

Others require clicking in the ruler above the timeline or dragging the actual playhead.

•

The playhead will obviously also move during playback, which can be started and stopped
by clicking buttons underneath viewers or above the timeline.

Moving the playhead, by keyboard:
•

Through playback, using j/k/l as a shuttle (repeated taps increase playback speed).

•

Most apps provide keyboard shortcuts for moving single frames left and right.

•

Most apps provide keyboard shortcuts for moving steps of multiple frames left and right (in
Premiere you can choose how large the steps are, Resolve only supports single seconds).

•

Most apps provide keyboard shortcuts for going to the previous or next cut.

•

Most apps provide keyboard shortcuts for going to the previous or next marker.

•

Most apps will use the Home and End keys to move to the start and end of the timeline.

•

Most apps provide keyboard shortcuts for going to the previous or next keyframe.

•

Most apps provide ways for typing timecodes.

Combining mouse and keyboard:
•

Adobe Premiere has a "move playhead to cursor" feature that can be bound to a key. Very
useful!

Using other devices:
•

Shuttle: allows controlling playback speeds and direction depending on how far you turn the
dial left or right.

•

Jog wheel: allows stepping left or right, frame by frame.

•

Blackmagic's Speed Editor has the option to change the function of its wheel between
shuttle, jog and scroll. The shuttle mode is practically unusable, but jog and scroll provide
amazingly fluid ways to navigate the timeline. Especially in combination with markers and
jumping between these by keyboard shortcuts, this is a wonderful way to work.

Zooming also needs to be mentioned here, because often we might be zoomed in, do some work,
zoom out to get an overview of the timeline, and zoom in to another part of the timeline.
Zooming in and out, by mouse:
•

Usually done either by using a zoom tool,

•

Or by using zoom sliders.

Zooming in and out, by keyboard:
•

Every NLE has keys to zoom in and out horizontally. Some (Premiere, Resolve, Avid)
support keys to expand and shrink all track heights at once (vertical zooming).

About keyboard shortcuts
I can imagine that all of the keyboard shortcuts for navigation were invented simply to provide
many options for each editor to choose what they need. This way, every editor can pick the
shortcuts that best fit their workflow.
Navigation by means of keyboard has very good support in most apps and it's a matter of providing
similar shortcuts in Lumiera. It could be expanded by allowing the creation of navigation markers
(a special category of markers) that are bound to keys or numbers. A user can jump to specific
markers by pressing a "go to navigation marker" key, followed by the key they bound. This is
basically Vim's way of doing it (m+0-9a-zA-Z to bind, backtick+0-9a-zA-Z to jump). Or we might
want to keep it as simple as having the regular ‘add marker’, ‘add and edit marker’ and ‘go to
next/previous marker’ keyboard shortcuts.
Sections will get navigation markers automatically, so a user doesn't have to create each marker
manually. Or we might want to include keyboard shortcuts for ‘go to previous/next section’.
Fast forward and fast rewind keys as found in Reaper might be a helpful addition to the
aforementioned keys. This would give as a quick way to skim a timeline by keyboard. While fast

forward and rewind can be achieved by the regular j/k/l shuttle controls, this requires a lot of
tapping to get to the desired speed, over and over again.

About mouse navigation
Scrollbars and zoom sliders have a different set of reasons for being chosen as the de facto standard
widgets for navigation. Familiarity on the one hand, and visibility on the other. By having these
controls visible at all times, yet outside of the working area itself, each user will be able to locate
them while they remain out of the way. These are very good reasons for their existence and
positioning, but they come at the cost of speed: moving your mouse cursor out of your main
working area towards the edges and back takes time and interrupts the creative flow. It works, but
it's not ideal. That's why I would like to propose an additional way to navigate by mouse, which is
by popup widgets. These will pop up around the cursor, triggered by a keyboard press (similar to
how Blender uses pie menus):
• Skim widget: by moving the mouse in a small bar we can quickly skim the entire timeline. This
will move both the viewport and playhead. Clicking the left mouse button will accept the new
position and close the widget.

• Autoscroll widget: when the user moves the mouse cursor slightly left or right, it will enter zones
in which the timeline view will scroll left or right (much like the autoscroll feature in Firefox).
When the user moves the mouse farther away from the initial starting point, the scrollspeed will
increase. This will also work vertically. The playhead will move along as well.

• Zoom widget: moving the mouse left or right from the center will zoom horizontally, up and
down will zoom vertically.

Mouse-only navigation:
• Combined widget: we could make a widget that combines skimming, autoscroll (only
horizontally) and zooming (horizontally). This widget is triggered by clicking and pressing the right
mouse button. When released, it will commit to the new location/view. If a user right clicks and
immediately releases the button, a regular context menu will appear.

Why popup widgets?
I can’t speak for others, but personally I dislike moving the mouse downwards towards the edge of
the screen to access scrollbars or zoom sliders. We’d like the mouse to stay in the center of where
we’re working.
With popup widgets, we might be able to improve navigation speed, but at the cost of familiarity
and visibility. That's why I propose to include all aforementioned widgets. We keep the traditional
sliders and scrollbars, but also add the popup widgets as an extra method for navigation for whoever
is willing to learn this.

Potential downsides
•

Widgets might be partially displayed offscreen when the mouse is near the edge of the
screen.

•

Very long timelines might make the skimming widget oversensitive. Possible solution:
either enlarge the bar, or create zones near the edges of the bar where the behaviour changes
to be similar to the autoscroll widget.

•

When using the keyboard shortcut versions: a downside is having even more keyboard
shortcuts that need quick access from the one hand that stays on the keyboard.

Arranging clips
To be written.

Selecting and moving clips
To be written.

Timeline tools vs modes
To be written.

Trimming
To be written.

Chapter 3: finishing
To be written.

Chapter 4: a broader GUI concept
To be written.

